---
layout: post
title: "Stack"
date: 2024-10-07
categories: [DSA, STL]
tags: [STL, C++, stack]
math: true
---

## Stack
Stack is a data structure that follows the Last In, First Out (LIFO) principle, meaning that the last element added to the stack is the first one to be removed. Elements are added and removed from the same end, typically referred to as the "top" of the stack.

__Real-life Example__
Imagine a stack of plates in a cafeteria. Plates are stacked one on top of another. When a new plate is added, it goes on the top of the stack. When someone needs a plate, they take it from the top. This is a real-life example of a stack where the last plate added (last in) is the first one used (first out).

__Example Code__
```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <stack>
using namespace std;

int main() {
    // Declaration and Initialization
    // Time Complexity: O(1) for initialization
    stack<int> myStack;

    // Pushing elements onto the stack
    // Time Complexity: O(1) for push
    myStack.push(10);
    myStack.push(20);
    myStack.push(30);

    // Displaying the top element
    // Time Complexity: O(1) for top
    cout << "Top element: " << myStack.top() << endl;

    // Popping the top element
    // Time Complexity: O(1) for pop
    myStack.pop();

    // Checking if the stack is empty
    // Time Complexity: O(1) for empty
    if (!myStack.empty()) {
        // Time Complexity: O(1) for size
        cout << "Size of stack: " << myStack.size() << endl;
    }

    return 0;
}
```

## Key Characteristics of Stack 
1. __LIFO (Last In, First Out)__: The most recently added element is the first to be removed.
2. __Container Adapter__: The `stack` is a container adapter, meaning it is built on top of other containers like `deque` (by default), `vector`, or `list`. It provides a restricted interface for interacting with these underlying containers.

## Important Modifiers of Containers Stack
- `empty()`: Time Complexity - O(1), constant time. It checks if the stack has no elements.
- `size()`: Time Complexity - O(1), constant time. It returns the number of elements in the stack.
- `top()`: Time Complexity - O(1), constant time. It returns a reference to the topmost element without removing it.
- `push(g)`: Time Complexity - O(1), constant time. It adds the element 'g' at the top of the stack.
- `pop()`: Time Complexity - O(1), constant time. It deletes the most recently entered element (the top element) from the stack.

## Underlying Container of Stack
By default, the stack uses `deque` as the underlying container, but you can also specify other containers like `vector` or `list` if they support back insertion and deletion.

__Customising the Stack's Underlying Container__
You can create a stack with a custom underlying container like below:
```cpp
stack<int, vector<int>> s;    // Stack using vector as the underlying container
```

## Applications of Stack
1. __Function Call Management__:
  Stacks are used to manage function calls in programming languages. When a function is called, its context (like local variables and return address) is pushed onto the stack, and when the function exits, the context is popped off the stack.
2. __Expression Evaluation__:
  Stacks are used to evaluate expressions in postfix (Reverse Polish Notation) and infix notation. They help in converting infix expressions to postfix and evaluating them efficiently.
3. __Backtracking Algorithms__:
  Stacks are used in backtracking algorithms, such as solving puzzles (like Sudoku) or navigating mazes. The stack keeps track of the choices made and allows the algorithm to backtrack to previous states.
4. __Undo Mechanisms__:
  Many applications, such as text editors and graphic design software, use stacks to implement undo functionalities. Each operation is pushed onto a stack, and popping an operation off the stack undoes the last action.
5. __Syntax Parsing__:
  Compilers use stacks to parse syntax and check for balanced parentheses or nested structures in code. The stack helps keep track of opening and closing brackets.
6. __Memory Management__:
  Stacks are utilized in managing memory allocation for local variables in programming languages, allowing for efficient use of memory.
7. __Depth-First Search (DFS)__:
  In graph traversal, stacks are used in the depth-first search algorithm to keep track of the nodes to be explored next.
8. __Web Browser Navigation__:
  Web browsers use stacks to maintain the history of visited web pages. The back button pops the current page off the stack and displays the previous one.
9. __Evaluation of Recursion__:
  When a recursive function is called, each call is pushed onto the call stack. This allows the program to keep track of the active function calls and return to the correct state after each call completes.
10. __Postfix Conversion and Evaluation__:
  Stacks are used to convert infix expressions (like `A + B`) to postfix expressions (like `AB+`) and evaluate them.