---
title: "rand()"
date: 2024-10-06 10:30:00 +0530
categories: [DSA, STL]
tags: [cpp, stl, algorithms, randomness]
math: true
---

## rand()
In C++, `rand()` function is a part of the C standard library (`cstdlib`) and is used to generate __pseudo-random numbers__. While not technically part of the STL, it's commonly used in conjunction with STL containers &  algorithms.

## Key Points about `rand()`
1. __Function Definition__ :  The `rand()` function returns a pseudo-random integers in the range `[0, RAND_MAX]`, where value of `RAND_MAX` is library-dependent but is guaranteed to be at least 32767 on any standard library implementation.
   ```cpp
   int rand();
	```
2. __Seeding with `srand()`__ : By default, the random number generator is seeded with the same value every time you run the program, which leads to the same sequence of random numbers. 
   
   To generate different sequence of numbers, you can seed the generator using the `srand()` function.
   ```cpp
   void srand(unsigned int seed);
	```
   The common way to seed the random number generator is by using the current time, which ensures a different sequence of random numbers each time the program is run.
   ```cpp
   #include <ctime>
   
   srand(time(0));    // Seed with current time
   rand();    // now everytime your code runs, 'rand()' gives you a new value
	```
	`srand()` function is used to change the default seed in the `random` library.

__NOTE__ :
In Python, `rand()` generates floating point numbers 
In C++, `rand()` generates integers 
   
## Generating random numbers in a Range
Write a function that generates random number in range `[a, b]`
```cpp
int random_ab(int &a, int &b) {
	return a + (ran() % (b - a + 1));
}
```

## Limitations of `rand()`
- __Quality of Randomness__ : `rand()` is a pseudo-random number generator (PRNG) and not suitable for cryptographic purposes or high quality randomness. It generates numbers based on an algorithm that produces a deterministic sequence, which can be repeated if seeded with the same value.
- __Limited Range__ : The maximum value that `rand()` can generate is limited by `RAND_MAX`. For generating random numbers in a much larger range, `rand()` might not be sufficient.

## Modern Alternative `std::random` in C++11 and Later 
C++11 Introduced a new random number generator framework in the `<random>` header, which provides better control and more advance random number generation mechanisms (e.g., different distributions and engines). This approach is more flexible and offers better randomness quality.

```cpp
#include <random>
using namespace std;

int main() {
	// Create a random number generator 
	random_device rd;    // Seed
	mt19937 gen(rd());    // Mersenne Twister engine
	uniform_int_distribution<> distr(1, 10);    // Range [1, 10]
	
	// Generate a random number in the range [1, 10]
	cout << "Random number between 1 and 10: " << distr(gen) << endl;

	return 0;
}
```